We conducted six-week microcosm incubations using hypolimnetic sediment and water from Falling Creek Reservoir (FCR), Vinton, VA, USA. Incubations were conducted in 177-mL glass jars, because extensive pilot testing revealed that these jars were highly effective at maintaining hypoxic conditions when sealed and oxic conditions when uncapped. We started the experiment with 102 microcosms split evenly into oxic (uncapped) and hypoxic (capped) treatments. After two weeks (similar to the 2019 whole-ecosystem HOx manipulation), we switched the treatment of approximately half of the remaining microcosms, generating a total of four oxygen regimes: hypoxic, oxic, hypoxic to oxic, and oxic to hypoxic. 

To set up the experiment, we collected sediment and water from the deepest site in FCR on 30 June 2021. Water was collected from 9 m depth using a Van Dorn sampler, and sediment was collected from the same location using an Ekman sampler. Samples were transported on ice back to the lab, then homogenized by stirring and shaking. We used a syringe to add sediment slurry (20 mL) to each jar, then slowly added 150 mL of hypolimnetic water, making an effort to minimize sediment disturbance. We stored the microcosms in an unlit incubation chamber at 15 ºC for the duration of the experiment, which corresponded to warm, end-of-summer conditions in the hypolimnion of FCR. 


Microcosm sampling

All microcosms were sampled destructively for dissolved oxygen (DO), total and dissolved iron (Fe), total and dissolved organic carbon (OC), pH, sediment OC, and sediment iron-bound organic carbon, with two sampling events per week for the first four weeks of the experiment. The hypoxic to oxic and oxic to hypoxic treatments were sampled three additional dates: one and two days after switching oxygen conditions and six weeks after the start of the experiment. Six microcosms from each treatment were sampled per sampling date before switching experimental conditions, and three microcosms were sampled per sampling date thereafter. All microcosms under a hypoxic treatment were sampled in an anaerobic chamber which maintained mean ambient oxygen conditions of ~0 ppm (Coy Laboratory, Grass Lake MI, USA) to reduce oxygen exposure during sampling.

To begin sampling a microcosm, DO was measured using a YSI DO probe. While measuring DO, we used the probe to gently swirl the water in the microcosm, homogenizing the water sample while minimizing sediment disturbance. Next, we used an acid-washed syringe to withdraw 30 mL of water for total OC (TOC), 13 mL for total Fe, 30 mL of water for DOC, and 13 mL for dissolved Fe analyses. DOC samples were filtered through a 0.7-µm glass fiber filter, and dissolved Fe samples were filtered through 0.45-µm filters. After taking samples for Fe and DOC, we withdrew as much water as possible without disturbing the sediment and measured pH from this sample in a separate container using an Ohaus Starter 300 pH probe (Parsippany, NJ, USA). Finally, we swirled the sediment with remaining water (approximately 1–5 mL) and poured this mixture into a 20 mL glass EPA vial, which we then froze for Fe-OC analysis. Hypoxic microcosms were stored in the anaerobic chamber for approximately two hours before analysis to ensure oxygen concentrations in the chamber were sufficiently low before opening the jars. Oxic microcosms were sampled immediately after removal from the incubator. 
We stored TOC and DOC samples in bottles that had been acid-washed and rinsed three times with the sample water and froze them for <6 months before analysis on an OC analyzer (Elementar Vario TOC cube, following Standard Method 5310B; APHA et al. 2017). Fe samples were preserved using trace metal grade nitric acid and analyzed using the ferrozine method (REFS Gibbs 1976). We also analyzed 22 of the Fe samples from day 23 using ICPMS.


Fe-OC analysis

We analyzed the amount of Fe-OC in both the whole-ecosystem and microcosm sediment samples using the citrate bicarbonate dithionite (CBD) method. This method was first described for marine systems by Lalonde et al. (2012) and has since been adapted for freshwater lakes by Peter and Sobek (2018). It is important to note that our measurement of Fe-OC as the percentage of OC that is extractable using CBD extractions is an operational definition (Fisher et al. 2021). We use this method for comparisons between oxygen treatments and comparisons with other published work that used the same general approach. 

Following the CBD method, each sediment sample was freeze-dried and divided into three treatments: initial, reduction, and control. “Initial” samples received no treatment and were used to measure the OC content of the sediment. “Reduction” samples were treated with a metal-complexing agent (trisodium citrate) and reducing agent (sodium dithionite) in a buffered solution (sodium bicarbonate) to measure how much Fe and OC were released as a result of Fe reduction. Control samples were used to account for the release of Fe and OC in the reduction treatment that resulted from processes other than Fe reduction. They were treated with the same buffer (sodium bicarbonate) and sodium chloride in the same ionic strength as the trisodium citrate and sodium dithionite of the reduction treatment. 
For both the control and reduction treatments, we measured 100 mg of homogenized, freeze-dried sediment into 15-mL polypropylene centrifuge tubes (Falcon Blue, Corning Inc., Corning, NY, USA). We then added 6 mL of either control or reduction buffer solution (0.11 M sodium bicarbonate) to each tube. The reduction buffer contained 0.27 M trisodium citrate, while the control buffer contained 1.6 M sodium chloride. After heating samples to 80ºC in an oven, 0.1 g sodium dithionite was added to the reduction samples and 0.088 g sodium chloride was added to control samples, and samples were kept at 80ºC for an additional 15 min. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 3100 RPM, and the supernatant was collected in a 50-mL centrifuge tube. This extraction process was repeated two more times for both treatments (Peter and Sobek, 2018). Finally, samples were rinsed three times using artificial lake water, which was prepared by diluting Artificial Hard Water from Marking and Dawson (1973) to 12.5% with Type I reagent grade water.

After extraction, all sediment samples (including those in the initial treatment) were dried and acid-fumigated for 48 hours to remove remaining citrate and bicarbonate (Harris et al. 2001). Samples were then run on a CN analyzer (Elementar VarioMax, Ronkonkoma, NY, USA) to determine the amount of OC per unit mass of sediment. 

Microcosm_sediment.Rmd provides the calculations associated with these sediment properties. We adjusted sediment mass to account for Fe loss during control and reduction treatments. The amount of OC removed with Fe reduction (CBD-extractable OC) was calculated as the difference between the OC content of the control and reduction samples and expressed as a percentage of the initial OC content of the sediment. 
